Thank you all very much for coming.
Some of you are just scooting
in at the last second.
How many of you, for you,
is this your first developers conference?
Wow, thank you all so much.
How many of you have been more,
how many of you have been to more
than two developer conferences?
Wow.
So all of you people who are newbies,
check out the old folks so you
know who to bug for questions.
All of you who have been
around for a very long time,
please welcome all these new people who
are helping us expand the community.
It is great to see you all here.
I'm glad we have the civic
auditorium this year.
Those of you who have been here for the
last two years know that we have always
overflowed the room that we have been in.
That doesn't seem to be a problem today.
At the rate we're growing, though,
it could be a problem
another year or two,
in which case we'll try and rent
out the San Jose Arena for the
next WebObjects overview session.
It is great to be here.
We are so excited to have you here.
We got a lot of great stuff to talk
about and a lot of great speakers and
people I want to bring up on stage,
so I'll go ahead and get started.
Just to start out with,
I want to welcome you to
the world of WebObjects,
for those of you who are
here for the first time.
We've got a lot of things to cover.
This is really a whole new beginning.
This is the beginning of my talk.
It's the beginning of
lots of cheesy animations.
More importantly,
it's a week full of learning.
There are so many sessions that people
have been working like crazy for the
last few weeks to get ready for you.
We have some brilliant people,
some fantastic speakers.
You're going to learn so much
here on the WebObjects track,
as well as in the other tracks that
you may have a chance to sample.
It's also the beginning of a
whole new era for WebObjects.
WebObjects, as you know,
really created the app
server market five years ago.
We've been working very hard to
try and bring it up into the modern
internet age with the emergence
of Java and internet standards,
as well as being part
of the Apple community.
And we really think we've done
something pretty fantastic.
It's a work in progress like
everything else in this world,
but we're very excited about what
we've done and really want to help
you get involved in what we're doing.
There's several things
we'll be learning this week.
First of all,
we want to help you get to know
the people behind WebObjects,
get to know the people that
you've been seeing email from or
code samples from over the years.
We want to give you the
inside scoop on WebObjects,
as you've probably heard
about this morning.
I want to talk to you a little bit
towards the end about some of the
things we're doing with documentation,
some of the training and consulting
services available for my services,
some information about the different
sessions you'll want to attend this week,
as well as a few surprises.
So to start with,
I want to invite out the
engineering team behind WebObjects.
These are the people who
have built WebObjects 5.
Tony Triovane is the new
director of WebObjects,
recently promoted to director in
charge of WebObjects engineering.
I've got you to hold your
applause to the end or we'll
never get finished with this.
Genevieve Perugina in charge of the
quality and sustaining engineering.
Andreas Wenker, Jeff Glasson,
Francois Jouault, and Stan German.
Big hand for WebObjects Engineering.
Of course,
all of you know that getting a product
out the door and building the software
is only a small piece of the puzzle,
so I also wanted to give you
a chance to meet the rest of
the team behind WebObjects.
Bob, if you could lead out the troops,
please.
This is the WebObjects support team.
Bob and I are in marketing.
We lead.
Other people follow eventually.
Please announce Bob Frazier,
the new WebObjects product manager.
John Gavish, and David Koehn,
and James Trenum.
This is a position that many of
you know I've been trying to fill.
My job is to be in charge of all
the developer stuff we do at Apple.
And I wanted someone who could
really focus on WebObjects,
who really understood the technology,
to really focus 100% on
building and selling WebObjects.
So very pleased to have
Bob Frazier on board.
Many of you know Tavares Ford.
He's at the end of the DTS email address
that many of you have to deal with.
Matt Rollefson, of course,
is in charge of
documentation for WebObjects.
He'll be sharing more shortly.
And then, Robert Esquire is in charge of
all the service and support for
WebObjects and Mac OS X Server in
the AppleCare organization.
And then, Tim Joernsen and James Dempsey
from Apple iServices,
who many of you know.
Thank you guys very much.
and of course the star of our show,
WebObjects 5.
WebObjects 5 is shipping today.
We are very excited to
have WebObjects 5 out here.
I was just telling a number of people
this is the first time I've ever had
all GM software sitting on my computer.
Mac OS X is GM, WebObjects 5 is GM,
Mac OS X Server is GM,
and not only is it all GM software,
I can hold it all in one hand
and carry it around for a full
day without getting tired,
thanks to the new Titanium PowerBook G4.
It's a wonderful time to
be an Apple developer.
We are very excited that the
original web application server
is now available in Java.
We really want the world to know that
this is the incredibly powerful way
to create Java server applications.
There's a lot of people building
server applications in Java,
a lot of them putting an
awful lot of effort into it.
We want to say, you know, hey,
we want people who are smart but
lazy to do it the WebObjects way.
There's really two things we're
focusing on with WebObjects 5.
We really see this as the engine
for powering the Internet,
because the most exciting thing
on the Internet today is rich,
dynamic content.
And this is a great way for large
organizations who have a lot of content,
whether that's digital multimedia,
whether it's large corporate databases,
or it's enterprise integration systems,
they need to be able to interact
with that data across the Internet.
This is also a great way for
web developers to bring their
applications to the Internet.
We have desktop applications,
client server applications,
legacy web applications.
They need something really flexible,
scalable, and maintainable.
We want people to see that WebObjects
really is the smart way to bring
their applications to the Internet.
Now some of you may be new to WebObjects,
so I just want to step real
quickly through the architecture
that we use in WebObjects.
Now all of you are familiar with
static websites where you have a
basic HTML file delivered through
a web server to a browser client.
What an application server does is
it makes that much more dynamic.
This way you don't have all
the same people saying the
same content all the time.
We introduce an application
server into the mix,
which allows you to put dynamic logic
in the middle of your application.
And then rather than having
to hand code the HTML,
you have templates,
which allow you to easily interject
the appropriate formatting and
presentation for your application.
And then you have an object model
you pull your information from.
Now a lot of these times
you will have the same file.
People try to put their application
logic and their object model and
their templates all together.
Some scripting languages,
which will remain unnamed,
are notorious for this sort of thing.
With WebObjects we have a nice strict
separation between our object model and
our templates and our business logic.
And our object model also isolates
you directly from the databases.
Your HTML file does not know
what database you are using.
It doesn't know the
scheme of your database.
All you know is that there's an object
model which can talk to mainframes,
databases, ERP systems, directories,
or XML files.
data streams.
The other great thing about this,
because of this modular architecture,
you can use that same logic and
the same backends to deliver
extremely rich clients using Java,
not just HTML.
And also you can use your application
server technology that runs on
the server to really scale up
the power and flexibility of your
system to meet increased load.
So with WebObjects 5,
there's really five key
benefits we're talking about.
Since we have so many new people here,
I really wanted to stress some of the
things that many of you in the WebObjects
community may have taken for granted.
And what people have failed
to realize is that WebObjects,
even though a lot of other people
have appeared in the last five years,
there's still several powerful
advantages that WebObjects has
over competing technologies.
These five key technologies
that I want to spend some time
on are automated data access,
streamlined page generation,
incredibly powerful rich
desktop application support,
of very scalable Java deployment
and integrated developer tools.
So to start with,
I want to talk a little bit more
about automated data access.
The big thing about WebObjects is you
don't need to write SQL or JDBC code
in order to talk to a database.
We automate all that hard work for you.
This makes a couple of benefits.
One, it means you're independent
of your database.
You can change databases,
you can modify the schema,
you can use several databases at once.
Your application code doesn't
have to know the intimate
details of your database.
Much more flexibility.
It also means your application
programmers don't have to be very
sophisticated database programmers.
We handle all the fetching,
all the caching,
all the updating of your database
objects automatically via this
transparent persistence layer
known as Enterprise Objects.
To help demonstrate this,
I want to invite up Ernest Kim of
the WebObjects engineering team
to do a quick demo of how we
do data modeling in WebObjects.
Ernest?
And can we please switch
to the demo machine?
So we have here WebObjects
5 running on Mac OS X,
taking advantage of the
gorgeous Aqua user interface,
and we'll go ahead and
create a new data model.
So we just go through and you notice
that JDBC is the preferred database
access mechanism for WebObjects 5.
You just access it via a standard
URL going over the network or to
the local host for a database.
For this example, we'll use OpenBase,
which is available as part of the
developer tools to support our examples.
There are a number of other
databases available for WebObjects,
as we'll be talking about shortly.
And we just find a database table,
we choose some of the information
that we want to walk through,
and it automatically goes and
reverse engineers a data model.
And we'll actually, for simplicity,
we'll skip over the relationships,
but you'll see there's
a whole host of tables,
and it goes through and it figures
out what the tables are and
generates objects that correspond
to that and defines a model file,
which can optionally include all
the referential integrity checks.
That means that you get a table that
says you get an object model that you
can work with in your application,
which is mapped to the database,
but it actually knows
about all the relationships
associated within that table.
So this tool,
just by talking to the database,
knows all the relationships,
the primary keys, the foreign keys, 2, 1,
too many relationships.
Incredibly sophisticated model
that is being figured out
automatically by the tools.
And this is all work that
you do not have to do.
The tool does it for you.
This means you can get started writing
your application logic and working
at the high-level object model using
the power of the WebObjects tools.
Thank you very much, Ernest.
So you've got your data model,
so you know what your data is.
Now the next challenge is doing
something interesting with it.
WebObjects provides a couple
of different ways that you can
really take advantage of that.
One is we handle a lot of the
hard work of page generation.
With WebObjects,
we try to really separate out the
information needed to generate
a page into three key pieces,
the HTML template, the business logic,
and the enterprise object
containing the data persistence.
And we use a technology called
Web Components to really
encapsulate these things while
isolating the HTML templates
and the logic from the data.
The Web Component architecture manages
all the hard work of doing HTML request
response to manage the sessions,
the users, the security,
all the things that become very
complicated when you're doing
three tier web applications.
This technology is also very flexible
and can be used to generate HTML,
XML, or even Smile for
multimedia applications.
It also makes it very easy to embed rich
client side scripting and other controls
into your data templates without having
to corrupt your business logic or your
database with any of that information.
It also has the ability
to be fully multilingual.
So you can create multilingual
sites using WebObjects technology.
So we're very excited about the
potential this offers to streamline
page generation and make it easier
for people to keep really rich,
visually compelling websites
very quickly and easily.
So to demonstrate that,
I'm providing up Tom Naughton from
the WebObjects engineering team.
Tom, push the demo, please.
There's a lot of different ways
that you can create WebObjects
applications from scratch or using
various tools and assistance.
We're going to create a type
of application known as a
display group application.
A very common way to view a database
is to look at a certain field and then
find other tables or fields that are
related to that piece of information.
[Transcript missing]
So we'll go ahead and just finish,
and this will go ahead and create
just a very simple web component.
So let's go into the web components
directory and actually see
the components that's created.
If we just double click on the WoW file,
that should launch WebObjects Builder,
and maybe you can maximize
that a little bit larger.
So you can see it creates
some interesting elements,
including a repeating
element within the area.
And these are just very simple tags
added into an HTML file that say,
when you get to this tag,
instead of just returning HTML,
talk to a WebObjects component
and return dynamic data.
Okay, so a very simple file,
a very simple HTML file,
very little piece of Java code.
And you can actually go
and run this application.
And when you do,
it launches WebObjects application.
It'll actually be smart enough to
launch your browser of choice and bring
up the URL for your web application.
And we'll be turning along,
compiling Java.
on Mac OS X,
taking advantage of the project builder.
First time we're launching
Internet Explorer here.
And you see,
we will bring up in seconds a full,
complete, sophisticated web application.
Go ahead and type in some data.
Go ahead and select an entry,
and it's there.
So we have a full,
sophisticated web application
created from scratch using
WebObjects in a matter of seconds.
Thank you very much, Tom.
And these are full-featured applications.
You can edit, browse, delete, add rows,
etc.
And you can easily take this simple
application and customize it.
These are things that usually take a
couple of weeks to get up to speed,
to get your data model,
to get your page generation,
to get your session
management all taken care of.
WebObjects does the hard work for you,
and it does it all using frameworks
rather than generated code for the
bulk of the logic that's going on.
And because it's framework-based,
you know it's our code
that we have built,
that we have tested,
that is reused across
all your applications.
So you don't have this huge mass
of generated code to maintain
as you sometimes get with
other development environments.
The other great thing about this,
because it uses frameworks,
we can substitute in other frameworks
for the viewing of your data.
And one particular way to do this
is using rich desktop applications.
HTML is great for a lot of browsing
and for the greatest possible reach,
but often you want to have a much richer,
highly interactive user experience,
which has client-side caching
for great responsiveness,
very live, active controls,
and very sophisticated
and complex widgets.
So through that,
we've found a number of tools
for integrating both Java and
Cocoa technology with WebObjects 5.
And to demonstrate that,
I'd like to invite up Ron Lusong
from WebObjects Engineering.
Ron?
Ron will get rid of the
browser because he doesn't
need that for his kind of apps.
And we'll go in to the project builder,
again, the heart of the
Mac OS X development experience.
We will create a Cocoa application.
And we'll just go ahead and create
the project using Project Builder.
And again, the important thing
is choosing the model.
The model defines the data access and
persistence of your application and
provides a strong typing that you can
use to define the other heuristics.
So we'll create a fairly
simple table here using Cocoa.
And again,
we just specify the entity that
we want to look at as well as
some of the key attributes.
And again, we can use the model to go
ahead and traverse different
entities and relationships to
walk through the data model.
and then add a few forms in
there for a more richer and
complicated user interface.
And again, add a query field for
what we want to look at.
And that brings us into Project Builder.
And instead of a web component,
we now have resources,
in particular an interface builder file,
or a Nib.
And the Nib uses the
technology known as EO Palette,
which provides the ability
to drag and drop connections.
So if you bring up a
connection inspector,
you can see how one of the tables
Those things are actually,
those forms are actually connected
into the database using the connection
mechanism in Interface Builder.
Little troubles.
Okay.
You cleaned up the Nib file
the way you wanted it,
Ron?
Okay, so Ron rearranged some
widgets in the Nib file.
Now we go ahead and
build the application.
And it's compiling the
Java down to JAR files,
wrapping it in a shell application,
conforming to the Mac OS X packaging
guidelines so you get a nice full
double-clickable application.
It'll automatically launch it for you.
And we have live in Java a complete
Cocoa application created using
WebObjects and Enterprise Objects.
It's all live, very quick series.
You don't have to deal with
page refreshes or page resizing.
Everything just works.
Great.
Thank you very much, Ron.
Those are three of the really key
powerful advantages in WebObjects
and WebObjects 5 in particular.
The other thing is
scalable Java deployment.
We have a nice Aqua compliant monitor
application that you can use to
browse all the different WebObjects
application servers on your network,
manage instances, controls.
And with WebObjects,
it's really easy to add new machines and
extend the reach of your application.
We support multiple instances,
multiple threads, multiple processors,
all running on one or multiple
machines to make it really
to create very sophisticated
and powerful web applications.
The other thing that's really
exciting about this that I wanted
to just talk to you about,
a lot of people were concerned when
they heard about the move to Java,
wondering about, wasn't Java slow?
Would it hurt performance?
So we got some very interesting results
back as we've been testing performance.
We did a simple test where we insert,
search for, and delete three movies.
The basic database access loop that is
common in these kinds of applications.
We ran it for basically
three server days,
six machines, three runs,
four hours each.
The results were very impressive.
On Mac OS X, Server Vision 10,
testing it against 4.5.1,
we found that we were 22% faster
than we were with WebObjects 4.5.1.
On Windows 2000 Pro,
we were over 50% faster than we were.
And of course you think, okay,
well that's for certain platforms.
What if I want to do some really
heavy-duty deployment on Solaris?
With Solaris, we were 187% faster.
So, I mean, there's several things you
can take away from this.
Obviously,
every application is different.
Every application has its own
performance characteristics.
This is a very simple test,
but it's the test that we've
been using to monitor the
performance of our runtime.
And one of the things this tells
you is the Objective-C stack was
highly optimized on Mac OS X.
It's been very optimized on Mac OS X.
The Java stack has also
been optimized on Mac OS X.
And you can see that we got a
benefit even just using Java versus
a highly tuned Objective-C stack.
On other platforms, such as Solaris,
where there's a lot of people working
on the Java stack and relatively few
people working on the Objective-C stack,
performance is even more impressive.
So this is the fact that we're
able to take advantage of all
the work that all the industry
is doing on Java performance,
on their database drivers,
on their runtime stack,
on their threading model.
It makes it very easy to
deliver very powerful,
scalable Java applications
using WebObjects 5.
But last but certainly not least is
the fantastic suite of tools that
make WebObjects such a joy to use.
Most people think of web application
development as this incredibly tedious,
painful, grungy thing.
With WebObjects, it's fun.
How many of you are addicted
to WebObjects development?
Those of you who have
been using it for a while,
there's a sense of which, if I can't,
I mean, some of you may know my history.
I started out doing next step
development while I was in college.
And when I graduated,
I ended up going into
management consulting.
Because if I could not use the tools
that I was used to using on my desktop,
there's no point in being a programmer.
And with Apple acquiring next
in the WebObjects technology
and making it available in the
mainstream in the mass market,
you know, in gorgeous places like
the Apple retail stores,
you know,
there's a chance for this technology
to really become mainstream and it
actually gets fun to program again.
I'm very excited,
as you probably guessed.
So there's five key technologies
that are part of WebObjects
in the application tool space.
WebObjects Builder for
HTML layout and design,
Interface Builder for laying
out Java and Cocoa applications,
the Project Builder, of course,
the heart of our development experience,
the fantastic
Enterprise Object Modeling tool,
and of course, Rule Editor.
Some people may not be
as familiar with that,
which is used for the direct-to-Java
client and direct-to-web
applications to manage these
automatically generated applications.
And there's really four key
advantages we're stressing to people
as we go and talk to the press,
talk to analysts,
talk to customers about why they really
should want to consider WebObjects.
The first one is rapid time to market.
WebObjects is really designed to support
very sophisticated modular development.
In fact, you can build things in parallel
with very good isolation where the
frameworks do the hard work for you of
application design and partitioning,
as well as some of the really painful
grunt work of session management,
page generation, and data access.
As well as a really comprehensive
suite of smart tools to streamline
the way you build your application.
This is really a dream environment
for a lot of people who don't really
believe the web development can
be this easy and can be this fast.
And I've talked to someone at
lunch today who is in a business,
an industry, where they have projects
that are six months long,
and they can't afford to spend
six months doing the design
of their application server.
They want something where they can
turn on an application that's robust
and tested in three months so they can
get their job done that much quicker.
And this is the tool
for people like that.
In addition,
there are the very powerful assistants.
They allow you to create fully
functional prototypes in just
seconds using the direct-to-web and
direct-to-Java client functionality.
They allow you to browse your database,
access your data from anywhere,
and then iterate on the important
pieces to create more sophisticated
and complicated web applications.
The second one is quality.
A lot of people, you know,
they rush things to market and
they have to sacrifice quality.
With WebObjects,
we try to reduce the problems there.
One is that we have a very
mature set of frameworks.
Again, WebObjects 5 is the first with
a version entirely in Java,
but a lot of the technology
has been part of Java client
WebObjects for several generations.
And the frameworks themselves
were designed by people who
really understand WebObjects,
who understand object technology
and object orientation,
and are able to really design things that
simplify the way that you develop your
application and be able to refine that
over the five generations and five years
that WebObjects has been in existence.
Also,
the way to get around Murphy's Law is
to have fewer things that can go wrong,
because we all know that
anything that can go wrong will.
But if you're running a small
amount of application-specific code,
anything that can go wrong with
your application is much smaller,
and therefore you're much more
likely to get a fully functional
application much quicker.
And because the same frameworks
are leveraged by so many
people over so much time,
they have much greater ability to
ensure the quality of those things.
WebObjects really tries hard
to isolate pieces of the
application one from another.
Your data access, your HTML,
your business logic are all
isolated from one another.
When you see the kind of programming
models where you have web designers
working on pages which have scripting
code embedded inside the web page,
which talk directly to a database,
that means if your beautiful,
creative graphic designer puts
a wrong comma in their code,
they could corrupt your
corporate database.
This is not a good idea!
We really want people to understand
the importance of properly architecting
their applications to ensure scalability
and security of your application.
Things like Java Client,
where with WebObjects you have
three-tiered Java clients where
the sensitive code is on the
server rather than on the client.
So if someone decompiles
your Java client,
they don't have access to all
your sensitive business logic,
where they can talk directly
to your data center.
Very powerful partitioning technologies
that really improve the security
and reliability of your application.
And last but certainly not least,
having all the referential
integrity constraints embedded
declaratively in the data model.
I mean, we all know what it's like
to work on a long project in
the wee hours of the morning,
trying to beat a deadline.
And it's very hard to make sure that you
remember all the little things that are
the dependencies between different pieces
of your database and your application.
And WebObjects handles all the hard work
remembering those tedious details for
you to make sure your data stays safe,
no matter how tired you may be.
And certainly the big thing
for WebObjects 5 is full
accessibility to Java.
WebObjects runs pretty much
anywhere with Java 2 platform,
standard edition 1.3.
Obviously,
in order to be qualified and supported,
you need to run one of the configurations
we've actually tested it against,
such as Solaris 2.8, Windows 2000,
or Mac OS X Server.
But the fact that it's in
Java makes it much easier to run
in a bunch of different places,
makes it more familiar
to Java programmers,
and also makes it easy to interoperate
with other Java solutions.
There are already people who started
working with the beta or early
releases of WebObjects to integrate
it in with servlets or EGB containers
or other Java technologies out there,
web services, etc.
One of the more exciting things is we
integrate the latest Xerxes XML parser
from the Apache Software Foundation based
on some very important IBM technology.
And it allows you to import
and export XML data into
your WebObjects application,
integrate it into your
Enterprise Object models,
to make it very easy for you to
create things like web services,
create things like
XML SOAP on top of WebObjects.
There are some very exciting
things we've done with WebObjects.
People are doing WebObjects today.
There are some even more exciting
things that we expect to be
able to do with WebObjects 5,
with the Java interoperability.
We're looking at some really
interesting technologies like
Enterprise Java Beans and web services,
and how to make it even easier
for you to create those kinds of
great solutions with WebObjects.
But even today,
because of the power of Java,
because you can run on
standard Java virtual machines,
it is very easy for you today
to go out and integrate these
things with standards-based
technologies wherever you need to,
to get your job done in the
environments that you're working in.
in your networks.
And last,
and this can't be stressed enough,
Avi mentioned this in the keynote,
WebObjects is a proven solution.
Some of the best brands on the
internet have deployed very
sophisticated mission-critical
web applications using WebObjects.
Whether it's customers doing
consumer-oriented websites,
higher education sites like the
University of Michigan Portal,
creative solutions like
Adobe InScope or the BBC News site,
or business solutions
like the MCI WorldCom or
AT&T Wireless Billing Solutions.
These are mission-critical
applications serving many customers.
And of course,
that doesn't even mention some of the
incredible Apple solutions available
like the Apple Store and iTools that
service millions of our customers.
Of course,
the greatest thing about WebObjects 5,
especially for those of you like me
who have been around for a while,
is that it's available today, here,
it's shipping.
Feel free to applaud.
As you know,
Apple decided this was just way too
powerful a technology to just leave
in the hands of a few very large
corporations with deep pockets.
So we've priced it at $699.
We put it in retail outlets
like the Apple Store,
so you can walk down
to Glendale and McLean,
Virginia,
or soon any of the other 25 Apple Stores,
and pick up a copy of WebObjects,
start building sophisticated
enterprise-scale web applications today.
It's available worldwide via the
Apple Store and authorized resellers.
There's evaluation copies available.
How many of you have already
installed your developer tools
CD you got in your backpack?
Okay, some of you have started.
For those of you who didn't notice,
the developer key that's associated
with it expires at the end of September,
and that is located in the
PDF file at the top level there.
So make sure you read through the README.
I know all of you read through
the README before you install,
but in case you don't,
be sure to do it this time so you
can get the license key that you'll
need in order to install WebObjects.
I'm also pleased to announce
that we will be providing very
steep discounts to ADC members.
Premier members will get
WebObjects 5 for free.
Select members will be able
to purchase it for $399,
almost half the price.
We think this is fantastic technology.
We want to get it out
to all our developers.
The other thing which isn't mentioned
here is that WebObjects 5 deployment,
the full unlimited deployment,
will be available as part of
Mac OS X Server version 10.
So if you buy Mac OS X Server version 10,
you can deploy your WebObjects
application for free as part of that very
high-performance Java 2 implementation.
WebObjects 5 will be
available as a single product.
It will be a single box containing
the developer tools for both
Mac OS X and Windows 2000,
as well as deployments
for Mac OS X Server,
Windows 2000, and for Unix.
A single box,
if you buy it from anywhere,
has all the pieces you need
to develop applications on the
leading desktop operating systems,
as well as deploy on
virtually any Java platform.
So that's the product of WebObjects 5.
Of course, there's more to it than that.
Just to give you a quick roadmap,
of course, WebObjects 4.5 was the
version released last year,
really bringing it to Mac OS X server.
The last release of the
WebObjects 4.5 train,
4.5.1, was released in May,
which supports
Objective-C applications on Mac OS X.
It provides a number of important
bug fixes for other environments.
And WebObjects 5, of course,
was released this week.
WebObjects 4.5 will be end of life.
In order to support WebObjects 5,
it will be in the channel.
WebObjects 4.5.1 will continue
to be available via phone order
from the Apple Store for quite
some time to come to enable our
legacy customers in the transition.
We definitely want to see
all of you moving to Java.
This is the future of database
development on the Internet.
And we're working very closely
to make sure that we have a good
transition story for our customers.
The Java converter provided in both 4.5
and 5.5 is a great way to get started.
WebObjects 4.5.1 and WebObjects
5 will convert your Java code,
as well as having a lot of the grunt
work of Objective-C to Java translation.
Obviously, there's semantic differences,
which requires some effort.
WebObjects 4.5.1 is also available for
those who have existing applications,
whether those are WebObjects applications
or legacy Cocoa EUF applications,
to enable you to run those
applications on Mac OS X.
However, I do want to stress the future
of WebObjects and of database
development on Mac OS X is Java.
At that point, that's all I had to
say about the product.
At this point,
I'd like to welcome up Matt Rollefson,
the Documentation Manager for
Technical Publications,
to share a few words about
the documentation strategy.
Raleigh?
Thanks Ernie.
So WebObjects is a pretty
large and complex product.
It makes it really easy to do a
lot of things but it also lets
you do a lot of different things.
And we have documentation to cover
these different areas of the product.
There's reference documentation for the
APIs in multiple different frameworks,
some of which you use everyday,
some of which you might only use when
you're doing some very specialized
type of custom configuration.
There's tutorial and overview information
to get you started so that you can get a
nice gentle introduction to the product
and figure out how do I approach this.
There is deployment information which
is something that's sort of unique to
WebObjects because it is not only a
sophisticated development environment
but it also has a very sophisticated
deployment story where you're going to
integrate multiple different servers,
potentially several machines,
running different instances
of your application.
. So there's a lot of information there.
Dynamic load balancing,
talking to different web servers
that may be running on completely
different operating systems.
And there's a lot of technology
built into WebObjects to
help you get that done.
And then we also have information
about specific focus tasks.
We've got a sales force that has
been working with large customers and
also small customers for a long time.
They've encountered specific scenarios
that seem to come up again and again.
Everybody wants to do this one thing.
And if only it were
described in just this way,
we could in fact get it done quickly.
So those are available as part of the
documentation that's online on your CDs,
gets installed on the system when
you install the developer tools.
You can also find that type of
information in the tech notes from
the website developer.apple.com.
Now, as part of Apple rolling
this out to a wider audience,
tutorial and introductory information
has been really important.
And we know that people like to
access things online for quick access,
but they don't necessarily like to
read lots of documentation online.
You know, sitting down and reading
through a 30-page PDF is
about as much as I can handle,
at least, on a screen,
let alone a 200-page book that is
going to give me a complete overview.
So, Technical Publications has a deal
with Fatbrain to publish documentation
online and also make it available
print-on-demand from Fatbrain.
So, the first book for WebObjects
that we released in this is
called Inside WebObjects,
and it came out this past winter.
I believe we released it last year.
We released it in January.
It is an overview of WebObjects 5,
gives you information about what are
some of the new technologies in here,
what are the four major development
approaches that I might take when
I'm looking at WebObjects and my
problem and whatever I want to solve,
and gives you some guidance
as to what are the tradeoffs,
what are some of the performance
implications of taking
one approach or another,
what are some of the flexibilities that
I might get from a very high level,
where I might be able to get some
of the information that I need.
So, that's the first part.
And then the second part is,
if I'm looking at a high level,
why should I choose one or the
other of these different approaches?
Very shortly,
we will have another book available
from FatBrain called Inside Web Objects:
Discovering Web Objects for HTML.
So this is the first of what is
going to be a series of books
examining the different approaches
to development on web objects,
taking you through a fairly
complex tutorial application,
teaching as you go,
so that you can figure out exactly how
do I write a web objects application
that presents a nice HTML interface
to users through a standard
browser that is highly scalable,
available,
and gives them access to all the
information they need from your database.
So look for that on our
website coming very shortly,
and more coming up in the
next six months or more.
All right.
Thank you very much, Raleigh.
Ron Lee's had an amazing job because he's
had two basically completely new versions
of fairly mature applications coming out,
both Mac OS X and WebObjects 5,
in the space of about two months.
And having to then, of course,
everyone who's used to the older
versions wants to have complete,
comprehensive information
about everything on day one,
the way they're used to after ten
years of development in other places.
So he's got a major challenge.
We're staffing up very hard to
try and really keep up with the
demand for information about this.
And it's going to take a little
while for us to catch up with all the
great work our engineers have done.
But we're very excited about the plan we
have in place to really try and address
that and get this information more out
to you sooner and more comprehensively.
Of course, having information is great.
Having people is even better.
We're proud to have some of the
best people in the business working
with Apple Professional Services.
At this point,
I'd like to welcome up Tim Joernsen
and James Dempsey from Apple iServices.
Hi, James and I are going to take a few
minutes to talk about Apple iServices
and what we've been up to.
About a year ago we were chartered
with delivering professional services
around Apple and Apple's technology,
WebObjects being a fundamental
cornerstone to that plan.
We also offer integration services
around Mac OS X and Mac OS X networks,
technical training,
which is really what James is
going to spend some time on,
as well as technical support.
On the consulting side,
we offer a full range of professional
services from project management to
software development to integration
and migration planning with
WebObjects and third-party solutions.
I just want to throw out some
synergies that you might think about.
For example, WebObjects could be used to
develop applications to help
manage Mac OS X networks and the
information in directory services
like LDAP to help manage that.
So there's a lot of exciting things that
can be done around Apple technologies
and how they can be leveraged together.
We continue to offer technical
support for WebObjects
development and deployment,
and we offer that in two levels,
the silver and gold.
We do this through support personnel
who are not only expert in their field,
they also strive to deliver that
information in a personalized
fashion with the goal of delivering,
of establishing a relationship
between Apple and you.
And as you would expect
with any professional,
any technical support organization,
they deliver that in a
timely and quick fashion.
Thanks, Tim.
So,
I wanted to talk just a little bit about
technical training in Apple iServices.
As Tim mentioned,
last year we were given the task to
bring what has historically been,
in the three years I've
been with the department,
a web objects training organization,
and deal more with all of the core
technologies of Apple computer.
We've been very, very busy.
In the next four weeks,
we are going to be rolling one a week
for brand new or revised courses.
We are going to be revising web
objects development one and two.
Those will be shipping
in about two weeks.
And we are also working on revising
web objects deployment for five.
In addition, we are very happy to
announce today two new system
administration courses for Mac.
We are also working on revising
web objects deployment for
Mac OS X and Mac OS X server,
as well as certification
programs around that.
Finally, we are also currently shipping a
Cocoa development course that we've
been working very hard on that we've
also been using internally to train over
200 of Apple's own software engineers.
I guess the final thing I'd like
to say is that in your bag that you
received today when you registered,
you'll find a card that
entitles you to the program.
It entitles you to 25% off any of
our developer training courses.
That is a deal that is good
as long as you sign up for the
training while you are here at
the show by visiting our booth.
After the show, it's a 10% discount that
lasts for a few months.
The details are in the
fine print on the card.
So we're very,
very excited about being able to
support Web Objects 5 with training
that's been time tested over years.
We're planning it,
updating it for the new Java,
pure Java version of Web Objects.
Thank you very much.
Just to throw out, for more information,
you can go to our website
at apple.com/iServices.
But again,
I would encourage you to visit the
exhibit fair where you can get the
extra discount on the training and
in addition answer any questions.
Thanks a lot.
All right.
Thank you, Tim and James.
So as I mentioned before,
we have a little surprise for you.
One of the questions that
people have asked is,
why is Apple doing WebObjects?
And there's a couple of answers to that.
One is that it's just so cool.
How could we not?
But...
But the other thing is that, you know,
as you heard this morning,
we are now the largest
reseller of Unix systems.
The people who build the
internet run on Unix.
And we are committed to making sure that
we can really live up to that legacy.
I come from a long time using BSD 4.2
way back in the Unix community.
I'm a card-carrying Usenix member.
I really like the culture
and the community of Unix and
the power and the mindset.
I've always been sort of appalled
by the graphical interfaces that
we've had in the Unix world,
which is why I fell in love with
Next Step and Open Step and so forth.
And the great thing about Mac OS X,
we really bring the power of Unix
with the simplicity of the Mac.
And we're really able to really
try and marry some of these things.
And one of my goals in development
platforms is to really make Mac OS X the
best platform for web development.
And so we're really trying very hard to
make sure that we work with the Java,
the Unix, the WebObjects,
the other technologies we have to
really create a very powerful and
compelling solution for Unix users.
And so we're really trying to make
sure that we work with the Java,
the Unix, the WebObjects,
and Java developers
doing web development,
as well as helping all of you people
who've been maybe involved with the
WebObjects or the Apple community for
years really take advantage of some
of the great things and opportunities
available in web development.
We have a lot of sessions
going on this week,
starting with the technical overview.
This is sort of just the real broad
brush of the WebObjects community.
Some of the key features to really
start digging into the technology
and how to start building stuff.
There's the overview.
We're also trying to make sure that we
allow you to overlap with some of the
key sessions from the Mac OS X track,
like the project builder introduction,
to allow you to understand the
tools that you're using on Mac OS X.
There's sort of a break point.
The first couple of days are really
focused on introductions to WebObjects
and the key technologies for all the
people who are new to the community,
for some of the old hands who've
been through this a couple of times.
You might want to start checking
in on some of the advanced sessions
available later on in the week,
starting around Wednesday afternoon.
So we're trying to make sure there's
something in here for everyone.
There's a lot of content in here.
The WebObjects team not only shipped
a product at the developer conference,
they shipped 17 sessions in
partnership with iServices,
which is just a fantastic job.
And I want to give them another
round of appreciation for all
the work that went into that.
And of course,
although we all believe that
WebObjects 5 is wonderful and it's
a great way to develop your apps,
it's still a work in progress.
We know there's going to be a few
things that we missed that may
have annoyed you or certain things
that you want to do with this
product we may not have considered.
And we want to hear that.
I'm here.
Bob Frazier, my product manager, is here.
We are here to listen to you,
to understand what it is you need,
what you want to do with WebObjects,
how we can make your life better,
how we can help you get
WebObjects in even more places,
how we can really help make Mac OS X the
best platform for web development,
how we can make Mac OS X Server the
best platform for deploying rich
Internet content using WebObjects,
Apache, and QuickTime streaming.
That's what we're here for.
If you don't catch us during the week,
you can catch us at the feedback
forum and lend us your ears.
So for more information,
we have a couple of
different places to go.
Actually,
a lot of different places to go.
The WebObjects at Apple.com is the
best single e-mail address to use.
That will go to both marketing
and engineering to make sure that
we track feedback and information
that you may have for us.
For things that may
require communication,
our code snippets are more lengthy
examples than we can jot down.
It's a great place to send us
information about what you need.
For iServices, for consulting,
integration, training, and support,
there's an 800 number
as well as websites.
There's several different websites.
There's an Apple.com WebObjects page,
which has been recently updated by Bob,
to cover all the great new
features in WebObjects 5.
There's a developer.apple.com website,
which will be updated soon,
to cover developer
resources for WebObjects.
There's the iServices website.
There's also an Apple.com website.
There's a mobile support site
maintained by Robert and his team,
which has discussion boards,
tech info library articles,
lists of updates, and other information.
We've also just recently created a
WebObjects announce mailing list,
which I need to go finish
and send an e-mail out to as
soon as I get out of here,
to provide people information
about new releases of WebObjects,
as well as other important information
affecting the WebObjects community.